None
None
[3, 5]
E. Soler-Hampejsek et al.

International Journal of Educational Development 59 (2018) 86–99

scores at the end of the program, with scores of males exceeding fe-
males in both writing and math, but did not examine potential diﬀer-
ences in skill retention by gender after the intervention.

2.2. The malawian context

Studying the retention of skills is particularly relevant in an en-
vironment such as Malawi. In 1994, the country became one of the ﬁrst
in sub-Saharan Africa to introduce free primary education. This policy
change resulted in large increases in enrollment, but these were not
accompanied by corresponding investments in school quality (Kendall,
2007). Access to the ﬁrst grade of primary school is almost universal
but the rate of dropout remains very high thereafter; according to the
2010 Malawi Demographic and Health Survey (MDHS), only 50.7% of
males and 38.3% of females ages 20–24 had completed primary (NSO
and ICF Macro, 2011).2 The internal eﬃciency of the system is weak,
due both to the large fraction who drop out before completing a level
and very high repetition rates. The World Bank estimates that it takes
23 student years to produce one standard 8 graduate (World Bank,
2010). Further, there is evidence from the Southern and Eastern Africa
Consortium on Monitoring Education Quality (SACMEQ) that learning
outcomes deteriorated between 1999 and 2004 (Chimombo et al.,
2005).

Complicating the process of skill acquisition is the multilingual
structure of Malawi’s education system. The ﬁrst four standards of
primary school are taught in the dominant language of a particular
school’s catchment area, which is commonly but not exclusively
Chichewa, the country’s national language, spoken by approximately
60% of the population. English is taught as a subject in all primary
standards, and becomes the oﬃcial language of instruction in standard
5. Proﬁciency in English is required for entry into secondary school. The
interplay between languages, as well as exposure to written material,
diﬀers by setting.

Malawi is a predominantly rural country, with 85% of its population
residing in rural areas (NSO, 2008). Literacy in any language is higher
in urban areas than in rural ones: nearly 80% of the urban population
aged 5 years and older are able to read and write in any language,
compared to about half of the rural population. The diﬀerence between
urban and rural areas is particularly stark with respect to English pro-
ﬁciency. Whereas, among the self-reported literate population, 98% of
the urban population and 97% of the rural population claimed to be
literate in Chichewa, 66% of the urban and 38% of the rural population
self-reported being literate in English. Use of print media is con-
siderably higher in urban areas. According to the 2010 MDHS, 45% of
urban males and 23% of urban females aged 15–49 read a newspaper at
least once a week, relative to 20% of males and 9% of females in rural
areas. While the size of gender gaps in schooling outcomes varies across
regions (Kalipeni, 1997; EMIS, 2013), gender gaps in educational at-
tainment are noticeably higher in the Southern region, the location of
the Malawi Schooling and Adolescent Study, as well as on the Central
region by comparison to the Northern region.

3. Conceptual framework

In Fig. 1 we present a theoretical model for the determinants of

academic skills after

school leaving. While academic skills at school leaving — which are
a function of background circumstances such as parental education and
socioeconomic status as well as grade attainment — clearly predict skill
level after school leaving, a number of factors that facilitate or inhibit
use of those skills are also key. For example, work may provide young

2 The Malawian education system consists of eight years of primary schooling (stan-
dards 1–8), four years of secondary (forms 1–4), and four years of university-level edu-
cation.

adults with an opportunity to use literacy and numeracy skills, whereas
parenthood, particularly for women in high fertility resource poor
settings who have limited access to books, magazines and newspapers,
may provide few opportunities to read and perform arithmetic calcu-
lations. We also hypothesize that sex of the individual is an essential
element, particularly in environments with traditional gender roles.

4. Data and methods

4.1. Data

The data for this analysis come from the Malawi Schooling and
Adolescent Study (MSAS), a longitudinal survey (2007–2013) with a
baseline sample of 1764 adolescent primary school students and 885
adolescents who were out-of-school. We restricted the present analysis
to respondents from the baseline student sample, for whom we ob-
served literacy and numeracy skills before school leaving.

The student sample was selected from ﬁfty-nine primary schools in
Balaka and Machinga, two predominantly rural southern districts of
Malawi. The 30 schools visited in Machinga represented nearly 20% of
primary schools in the district at baseline, and those in Balaka re-
presented nearly 25% of primary schools in that district. The prob-
ability of a particular school being included in the sample was pro-
portional to its enrollment in 2006.3 At each school we interviewed
approximately 30 students in standards 4–8, the last 5 years of primary
school, stratiﬁed by gender and age. The students were randomly se-
lected from all students aged 14–16 at the beginning of the 2007 school
year who were recorded in the school registers. It is important to note
that, as resources were limited, we did not collect data on adolescents in
the same age group who were attending secondary school, nor did we
collect data from adolescents who were attending primary school but
had not reached standard 4. According to the 2004 MDHS data (NSO
and ORC Macro, 2005), of the 75% of males and 71% of females aged
14–16 in the southern region who were enrolled in school, 11% of
males and 17% of females were enrolled in secondary school, 73% of
both males and females were enrolled in primary school in standards
4–8, and 16% of males and 10% of females were enrolled in standard 3
or lower. Therefore, although the student sample did not include the
top and bottom tier students, it reﬂected the educational experience of
the vast majority of young people in southern Malawi.

Respondents were aged 14–17 when ﬁrst interviewed between May
and July of 2007 and were re-interviewed annually until 2011 and
subsequently in 2013. The baseline student sample included 889 males
and 875 females. The study achieved a re-interview rate for of 94.9%
for both males and females in 2008, 92.5% for males and 93.1% for
females in 2009, 90.7% for males and 92.0% for females in 2010,
90.2% for males and 91.5% for females in 2011, and 79.5% for males
and 88.9% for females in 2013.

and

family

educational

The MSAS instrument included an extensive set of questions on
household
attainment,
characteristics,
schooling history and experiences, household labor and employment,
sexual behavior, marriage, and health. The study also included short
assessments of oral reading and reading comprehension in English and
Chichewa, and written numeracy skills. For the oral assessment, re-
spondents were asked to read aloud two sentences in Chichewa and two
sentences in English.4 The reading of each sentence was scored by the
interviewer as: a) cannot read any part of the sentence, b) able to read
only part, and c) able to read the whole sentence.

The ability to read a sentence out loud is a skill that precedes
reading comprehension in the literacy acquisition process (Chall et al.,

3 The number of schools visited in each district was based on estimates of (1) the
proportion of students in the age group attending primary school, (2) estimated atten-
dance rates (3) estimated attrition rates, (4) estimates of transitions to secondary school
and school dropout.

4 The sentences used were drawn from the 2004 MDHS.

88

E. Soler-Hampejsek et al.

Table 1
Analytical sample.

International Journal of Educational Development 59 (2018) 86–99

Total

Males

Females

N

% of baseline sample N

% of baseline sample N

% of baseline sample

Included in analytical sample
Left school between 2nd term of 2007 school year and 2nd term 2011–12 school year

1118

63.4%

460

51.7%

658

75.2%

Not included in analytical sample

In school after 2nd term 2011–12 school year
In school last time interviewed, lost to follow up
Missing relevant data

Total baseline sample

494
114
38
1764

28.0%
6.5%
2.1%
100.0%

323
84
22
889

36.3%
9.4%
2.5%
100.0%

171
30
16
875

19.5%
3.4%
1.8%
100.0%

round 1 numeracy assessment was repeated in rounds 3 and 5. The
numeracy score is the total number of correct answers to the 12 pro-
blems in the assessment.

4.2. Analytical sample

To investigate reading and numeracy skills after school leaving, we
considered all baseline students who were known to have left school
during the course of MSAS and for whom we had an assessment of skills
close to the time of school leaving (one term before school leaving or up
to two terms after school leaving), and at least one subsequent assess-
ment of skills. The resulting analytical sample included 1118 re-
spondents who left school between the second term of the 2007 school
year and the second term of the 2011–2012 school year.6 Note that of
these 1118 respondents, those who left school during the 2007 school
year—50 males and 166 females—were excluded from the reading
comprehension analysis as a measure of their reading comprehension
skills at school leaving was not available in the dataset. Not included in
the analytical sample are 494 respondents who were still attending
school past the second term of the 2011–2012 school year, 114 re-
spondents who were attending school the last time they were inter-
viewed and were lost to follow up in or before round 6, and 38 re-
spondents who are known to have left school during the relevant time
for this analysis but for whom we are missing relevant data (see
Table 1).

4.3. Explanatory variables

The ﬁrst set of variables included in our analyses includes constant
sociodemographic characteristics: female (versus male), belongs to the
Yao ethnic group (versus others), age at baseline, whether the re-
spondent’s biological parents completed primary school, and a time-
varying count of household items.7 It also includes respondent’s grade
attainment and age at school leaving.

The second set of variables includes respondent́s skills—ability to
read sentences, reading comprehension score, and numeracy scor-
e—measured near the time of school leaving. To assess respondents’
ability to read sentences at school leaving, separately for each language,
we deﬁned three mutually exclusive categories: (i) “no skill” if the re-
spondent could not read at all; (ii) “low skill” if the respondent could

6 Note that during the course of the MSAS, the school calendar in Malawi was changed
from a January to a September start. In 2007–2009, the school year started in January
and ended in November. The transition occurred with a compressed school year that
started in December 2009 and ended in August 2010. The following school years started
in September and ended in July.

7 Respondents’ were asked whether their household had any of the following 14 items:
mattress, sofa, table, chairs, paraﬃn lamp, television, radio, mosquito net, bicycle, mo-
torcycle, car, tin roof, electricity, boat/canoe. We include a simple count of these items,
results do not change in any signiﬁcant way if instead we use an index generated through
principal components analysis.

read parts or one complete sentence but not both sentences; and (iii)
“high skill” if the respondent could read both sentences in full.

We also included a set of binary indicator variables to control for
whether the assessment near the time of school leaving was conducted
one term before school leaving, the same term as school leaving, or one
or two terms after school leaving. We do this to control for the im-
precision in the timing of the assessment relative to school leaving. We
also included the time since school leaving, measured as the number of
years between the measurement of skills near school leaving and the
measurement of skills after school leaving. For the purposes of these
analyses, we assume that the skills measured closest to the time of
school leaving (one term before school leaving or up to two terms after
school leaving) represent skills at the time of school leaving, although
skills might have improved or deteriorated between the assessment and
the actual last day of school attendance. The assessment was conducted
two terms after school leaving only for 43 respondents. We refer to the
leaving as skills “at school
assessment conducted close to school
leaving,” and we refer to the assessment(s) conducted subsequently as
“after school leaving” for the remainder of this paper. Given that the
reading comprehension units and numeracy questions were repeated in
alternate years, we also included a variable indicating whether the
assessments measuring skills at and after school leaving were the same
version of this tool.

Third, we include time-varying individual and household-level
variables measured at the same time as each assessment after school
leaving: whether the respondent was working, whether the respondent
spent two hours or more doing domestic work the day before the
survey, whether the respondent was married, whether the respondent
had ever given birth, whether the household had any books, and
whether the household had a cell phone.

Finally, we included a series of indicators on use of skills and ex-
posure to mass media that were only measured at round 6 and are thus
treated as constant in the models: reads anything at least once a week;
calculates prices, costs, budgets, or uses fractions, decimals or percen-
tages at least once a week; listens to the radio at least once a week; and
watches television at least once a week.

4.4. Statistical methods

The data are structured as observations nested within individuals
sampled from schools, so we structure the analysis as a series of multi-
level regressions with random intercepts at the school and individual
level. To investigate the determinants of oral reading after school
leaving we use multi-level logistic regression models where the out-
come is equal to 1 if the respondent has a high skill level after school
leaving and 0 otherwise. To investigate the determinants of reading
comprehension and numeracy skills after school leaving we estimate
multi-level linear regression models for the respective scores after
school leaving. It should be noted that individuals may have more than
one assessment after school leaving depending on the time when they

90

